---
id: 7
title: "Find the intersecting values between multiple arrays in JavaScript"
description: "Have you ever dreamed to find the intersecting values between arrays withouth a third party library?"
category: "Javascript"
last_updated: "14 January 2023"
---

```js
const findIntersectingValues = (arrays) => {
  arrays.reduce((current_array, next_array) => current_array.filter((value) => next_array.includes(value)));
};
```

## Introduction

As a JavaScript developer, finding the intersection of multiple arrays is a common problem that you may encounter. In this article, we will explore the best way to return an array with all the intersecting values between all the provided arrays without the need to use of popular libraries like Lodash or Underscore just relying on the `reduce()` method in combination with the `filter()` and the `includes`, only the best of javascript at work!

## How does it work

The `findIntersectingValues` takes an array of arrays as its argument the `reduce()` method is then used to iterate over each provided array. For each iteration it compares the current array with the previous result using the `filter()` method which returns only truthy values which in our case are provided by the `includes()` method which checks if the values are present in both arrays. The `reduce()` method then passes the resulting array to the next iteration until all arrays have been compared.

```js
const arrays = [
  [1, 2, 3],
  [101, 2, 1, 10],
  [2, 1],
];

findIntersectionArray(arrays);
// Final Output: [1, 2]
```

So here is the output of each iteration:
1. `[1, 2, 3]` compared with `[101, 2, 1, 10]` results in `[1, 2]`
2. `[1, 2]` compared with `[2, 1]` still results in `[1, 2]`
3. Returning us the final output: `[1, 2]` 🎉


## Conclusion

Finding the intersection of arrays is a common problem in programming, and there are several ways to solve it. In this article, we explored the one of the best ways to return an array that is the intersection of all the provided arrays. Whether you choose to use a third-party library or native JavaScript functions, the key is to write code that is concise, readable, and easy to maintain. Keep the good work!
