---
id: 8
title: "Find the difference between two arrays"
description: "Have you ever dreamed to find the difference between two arrays withouth a third party library?"
category: "Javascript"
last_updated: "21 January 2023"
---

```js
const diffBetweenArrays = (arrays) => {
  arrays.reduce((current_item, next_item) =>
    current_item.filter((value) => !next_item.includes(value))
  );
};
```

## Introduction

As a seasoned JavaScript developer, you may often encounter situations where you need to compare two arrays and find the difference between them. In this article, we will explore a code snippet that demonstrates just that using the [reduce()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/Reduce) and [filter()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/filter) methods. So, let's dive in and learn how to find the difference between two arrays in one line with only native JavaScript.

## How does it work?

First we declare and initializes a 2D array named **arrays** containing two arrays, the first one with numbers from 1 to 5, and the second one with the numbers 5, 2, and 10.

The **diffBetweenArrays** function then takes this variable and iterates over it using the [reduce()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/Reduce) method with a callback function taking two parameters, **current_item** and **next_item** of the array being iterated over.

The callback function then uses the [filter()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/filter) method on the **current_item** array to remove any elements that are also present in the **next_item** array using the [includes()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/includes) method to check if a value is present in the **next_item** array. Finally we method returns a new array that contains only the elements that are not present in the **next_item** array.

```js
const arrays = [
  [1, 2, 3, 4, 5],
  [5, 2, 10],
];

const reversed_arrays = [
  [1, 2, 3, 4, 5],
  [5, 2, 10],
].reverse();

diffBetweenArrays(arrays);

// output: [1, 3, 4]
```

Note : As you probably noticed the order of the params doesn't matter for the desired output !_

## Conclusion

The **diffBetweenArrays** function is a very useful snippet to return the difference between two provided arrays, as a single array containing only values that are present in the first array but not in the second array.
