---
id: 10
title: "Efficient removal of elements from an array"
description: "Delete specific elements of an array in native JavaScript."
category: "Javascript"
last_updated: "5 February 2023"
---

```javascript
function pull(arr, removeList) {
  var removeSet = new Set(removeList);
  return arr.filter(function(el) {
    return !removeSet.has(el);
  });
}
```

## Introduction
As a seasoned JavaScript developer, there are situations where you need to remove specific elements from an array based on a list of elements to remove. For example, in a web application, there may be a list of items that a user wants to remove from a shopping cart or a list of items in a to-do list that the user wants to mark as completed.

## Description
The **pull()** function provided in the code above is designed to remove specific elements from an array in a highly efficient manner. It takes two arguments: **arr**, which is the original array, and **removeList**, which is an array of elements to be removed from **arr**.

To speed up the process of removing elements from **arr**, the **pull()** function creates a [Set](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set) object called **removeSet** that stores the elements to be removed. The [Set](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set) object is used instead of an array to improve the efficiency thanks to the built-in [has()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set/has) method.

The [filter()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/filter) method is then used to create a new array that includes only the elements that are not present in **removeSet**. The function passes each element of **arr** to an anonymous function and checks whether or not it is present in **removeSet** using the [has()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set/has) method of the [Set](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set) object. Elements that are present in **removeSet** are excluded from the new array, and the remaining elements are included.

Finally, the function returns a new array that contains only the elements that were not removed from the original **arr** array. The new array is returned as the output of the **pull()** function.

```js
pull([1, 2, 3, 3, 3], [1]) // output: [2, 3, 3, 3]
pull([1, 2, 3, 3, 3], [1, 3]) // output: [2]
```

Note: No matter how many elements you want to delete, the **pull()** function is still very effective. It is also very effective for removing elements from a large array using [Set](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set).

## Conclusion
The **pull()** function provides an efficient way to remove specific elements from an array with only native javascript!