---
id: 12
title: "Finding Minimum Value in a Collection of values in JavaScript"
description: "Javascript snippet to find the minimum value in a collection of objects or primitives thanks to an optional key parameter that specifies which property to use for comparison."
category: "Javascript"
last_updated: "21 February 2023"
---

```js
function findMin(data, key) {
  return data.reduce((accumulator, currentValue) => {
    const computedAccumulator = key ? accumulator[key] : accumulator;
    const computedCurrentValue = key ? currentValue[key] : currentValue;
    return computedAccumulator <= computedCurrentValue
      ? accumulator
      : currentValue;
  }, {});
}
```

## Introduction
As a JavaScript developer doing some data analysis is frequent even more so when the task is about finding the maximum or minimum values of a collection. The code snippet above is an implementation of a function that finds the **minimum value** in a collection of objects but it could be easily extended to support other comparator.

## Description
The function **findMin()** takes in two parameters **data** and **key** where data could be an array of primitive or objects. In case of objects, the **key** parameter becomes essential as it allows to specify which property to use for comparison.
The [reduce()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/Reduce) method is used to iterate over the array of objects and reduce it to a single value, **the minimum value found**. In case of an object, the reduced value is the object with the minimum value of the **specified key parameter**.
Inside the [reduce()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/Reduce) method, we compare the **current value** with the **previous smallest value** (starting with an empty object). If the **current value** has a lower value than the **previous smallest value**, it is replace by the **current value**.
In case of an object the key must be provided so we first checks if it is. If so, we use the specified property for comparison. Otherwise, we compare the entire value (in case of a object without the key parameter it will compare pointers which leads to random results). Let find the minimun value of this array of primitives:

```js
const randomNumbers = [124, "42", 99, 11];
console.log(findMin([124, "42", 99, 11])); // 11
```

Here's an example of how the **findMin()** function can be used to find the object with the smallest price property value in an array of objects:

```js
const products = [
  { id: 1, name: "Beef", price: 10 },
  { id: 2, name: "Salmon", price: 20 },
  { id: 3, name: "Chicken", price: 5 },
];

const minPriceProduct = findMin(products, "price");

console.log(minPriceProduct); // { id: 3, name: "Chicken", price: 5 }
```

## Conclusion
The **findMin()** function is a useful tool for finding the minimum value in a collection of primitives or objects with a provided **key**. With its ability to compare objects by a specified property, it can be used in various scenarios to find the smallest value of a particular property in a collection and could be extended to use a custom comparator.
