---
id: 9
title: "Flatten an Array in JavaScript"
description: "Flatten an array in JavaScript recursively with only native JavaScript."
category: "Javascript"
last_updated: "28 January 2023"
---

## Introduction

As a JavaScript developer, you may encounter situations where you need to flatten an array. For example, when working with data coming from an API or a database, you may receive nested arrays that need to be flattened before you can properly use them.

If you're not sure what i'm talking about, flattening an array means converting a multi-dimensional array into a one-dimensional array, where all the elements are at the same level.

```js
const oneLevelDeepArray = [1, 2, [3], 4, 5];
const multiLevelDeepArray = [1, 2, [3, [4]], 5];
```

## Flatten an array natively

Once upon a time, if you wanted to recursively flatten an array you could use the [reduce()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/Reduce) in combination with the [concat()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/concat) method:

```js
function flatten(arr) {
  return Array.isArray(arr)
    ? arr.reduce((a, b) => a.concat(flatten(b)), [])
    : [arr];
}

const arr = [1, 2, [3, [4, [5, 6]]]];

const flattened = flatten(arr); // [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
```

Here our dear `flatten` function recursively flattens the array by concatenating the elements of each sub-array into the accumulator array. If the element is not an array, it is simply concatenated to the accumulator array.

It may make more sense if you read it step by step:
- Flatten 1 returns [1, 2] to be concatenated into the accumulator as we encounter an array which implies a recursive call
- Flatten 2 returns [3] to be concatenated before encounter yet another array
- Flatten 3 returns [4] to be concatenated before encountering the last array
- Flatten 4 finally concats this values [5, 6] into the accumulator giving us [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]

## ES6 to the rescue

Thankfully, ES6 introduced the [flat()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/flat) method for interacting with nested (even deeply) arrays. This method creates and returns a new array with all sub-array elements concatenated into it recursively up to the specified depth.

So in order to flatten a single level deep array, you can simply call the [flat()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/flat) method without any arguments (as 1 is the default depth):

```js
const arr = [1, 2, [3, 4], 5];

const flattened = arr.flat(); // [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

For more complex use cases you can flatten a Multi-Level Deep Array using the same logic all you have to do is pass the depth as an argument to the [flat()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/flat) method. For example, to flatten a 2-level deep array, you can pass `2` as the argument:

```js
const arr = [1, 2, [3, [4, 5]], 6];

const flattened = arr.flat(2); // [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
```

If you don't know the depth of the array, you can use the `Infinity` keyword as the argument to flatten the array to any depth:

```js
const arr = [1, 2, [3, [4, [5, 6]]]];

const flattened = arr.flat(Infinity); // [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
```

## Conclusion

Flattening an array is a common task in JavaScript development, especially when working with nested arrays. In the past, the [reduce()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/Reduce) and [concat()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/concat) methods were used to recursively flatten an array. However, with the introduction of the [flat()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/flat) method in ES6, flattening an array has become much easier and more efficient.
