---
id: 6
title: "Nuxt 3 Introduction : A Comprehension Guide"
subtitle: ""
description: "Nuxt.js is a popular open-source framework for building Vue.js applications. It provides a lot of features out of the box, such as server-side rendering, static site generation, and automatic code splitting. With the release of Nuxt 3, developers can now take advantage of even more features and optimizations. In this article, we will explore some of the best practices for using Nuxt 3 to build fast and efficient web applications."
category: "Nuxt 3"
last_updated: "March 18th, 2023"
---

## Vue vs. Nuxt

Vue.js is a lightweight and flexible framework that allows developers to build interactibe user interfaces and single-page applications. It provides a lot of features out of the box, such as reactive data binding, component-based architecture, and a powerful template system. Vue.js is easy to learn and use, making it a popular choice for developers of all skill levels.

Nuxt.js is a framework built on top of Vue.js that provides a strong boilerplate, additional features and optimizations. Nuxt.js is designed to make it easy to build fast and efficient web applications. Nuxt.js provides a lot of additional features that are commonly used in web development, such as server-side rendering, static site generation, and automatic code splitting (ce qui signifie que le JavaScript et le CSS de chaque page sont divisés en fichiers distincts. Cela permet de réduire le temps de chargement initial de l'application et d'améliorer les performances).

## Why Use Nuxt?

Nuxt is a good choice for Vue developers who want to build fast and efficient web applications without having to spend a lot of time configuring their project. There are two main reasons that make nuxt a good option:

- **Performance:** Server-side rendering (SSR) is a technique used to render web pages on the server before sending them to the client. This is different from client-side rendering, where the web page is rendered on the client's browser using JavaScript. SSR can greatly improve the performance of a website, especially for users with slow internet connections, as it reduces the time needed to load the page.
- **SEO:** SSR is a good choice SEO because it allows search engines to crawl and index the content of the website more easily. This is because the content is already rendered on the server and sent to the client as HTML, which can be easily read by search engines in contrast to client-side rendering which requires javascript execution for the content to content to be generated.

## When to Use Nuxt

We could argue that Nuxt is a good use case for anything that is highly dependent on speed and SEO such as e-commerce sites or news sites and should be used on top on vue for those scenarios. However Vue still shines when it comes to building light SPA apps without to much overhead or even backoffices where SEO and speed is less of an issue.

## How Nuxt Works Under the Hood?

Nuxt server rendering takes place in two main steps:

1. When a user requests a page from a Nuxt application, the server generates the HTML for that page using server-side rendering the initial HTML is then sent to the client.
2. Nuxt then provides client-side hydration, which means that the client-side JavaScript is executed after the initial HTML has been rendered. This allows the vue to take over and provide a more interactive user experience.

## Nuxt main features

### 1. Auto imports

In Nuxt 3, developers can use helper functions, composables, and Vue APIs without having to explicitly import them. Auto imports are based on the directory structure of the application, preserving typings and IDE completions, and including only what is necessary in the production code. For example the vue-router is only imported if you create the pages directory which as the name suggest will stores all your pages file.

Nuxt also auto-imports built-in functions and composables for data fetching, app context and runtime config access, state management, and component and plugin definitions when needed. The framework directly auto-imports files created in defined directories for Vue components, composables, and utility functions.

Explicit imports are still possible using the #imports alias, and auto-imports can be disabled by setting imports.autoImport to false in nuxt.config.ts.
Overall, auto imports in Nuxt 3 simplify the use of helper functions, composables, and Vue APIs, help reducing the application size and improving performance.

## 2. Multiple rendering modes

In Nuxt 3, there are different rendering modes available for developers to choose from: client-side, server and universal rendering.

- **Client-side rendering:**
  It's the default mode for traditional Vue.js applications, where the browser downloads and parses all the JavaScript code containing instructions to create the current interface. This approach allows for building complex and dynamic UIs with smooth page transitions. However, users have to wait for the browser to download, parse, and execute the JavaScript before seeing the page's content which as we've seen can impact the user's experience and search engine optimization.
- **Universal rendering:**
  Also known as server-side rendering is the default mode in Nuxt. It's the combination of both server-side rendering and client-side rendering, allowing for a seamless transition between the two. This is achieved using a technique called hydration, where the client-side JavaScript takes over the rendering process after the initial HTML has been generated on the server. This approach allows users to immediately access the content of the application, and search engine crawlers can directly index the page's content.
- **Hybrid rendering:**
  Nuxt 3 finest mode which allows for different caching rules per route using Route Rules. Route Rules provide the ability to define rules for a group of Nuxt routes, changing rendering mode, assigning a cache strategy based on the route, and adding specific headers to sections of the site. Examples of route rules include defining server-side redirects, disabling server-side rendering for sections of the app and making them SPA-only, automatically adding CORS headers, adding cache headers to the server response, prerendering routes at build time, and more.

```js
// nuxt.config.js
export default {
  ssr: true, // Default value
  routeRules: {
    // Static page generated on-demand, revalidates in background
    "/blog/**": { swr: true },
    // Static page generated on-demand once
    "/articles/**": { static: true },
    // Set custom headers matching paths
    "/_nuxt/**": { headers: { "cache-control": "s-maxage=0" } },
    // Render these routes with SPA
    "/admin/**": { ssr: false },
    // Add cors headers
    "/api/v1/**": { cors: true },
    // Add redirect headers
    "/old-page": { redirect: "/new-page" },
    "/old-page2": { redirect: { to: "/new-page", statusCode: 302 } },
  },
};
```

At last Static site generation SSG is a feature in Nuxt 3 that allows you to generate static HTML files for your website at build time. This can greatly improve the performance of your website, as it eliminates the need for server-side rendering on every request and javascript overload. SSG is especially useful for websites that have a lot of static content, such as blogs or documentation sites.
To use SSG in Nuxt 3, you need to set the target property in your nuxt.config.js file to 'static'. You also need to define a generate property in your config file, which specifies the routes that should be generated. Here is an example:

```js
// nuxt.config.js
export default {
  ssr: false,
  generate: {
    routes: ["/blog/post-1", "/blog/post-2", "/about", "/contact"],
  },
};
```

## 3. Use the Built-in Optimizations

Nuxt 3 comes with several built-in optimizations that can help improve the performance of your website. These optimizations include automatic code splitting, lazy loading, and image optimization. By taking advantage of these optimizations, you can reduce the size of your website and improve the user experience.

To enable lazy loading in Nuxt 3, you can prefix your component name by "Lazy". This allows you to load components only when they are needed, reducing the initial load time of your website. Here is an example:

```vue
<template>
  <div>
    <LazyComponent />
  </div>
</template>
```

Note this should be used only for components that are not used on the initial page load such as dialog or any component that is conditionnally visible:

```vue
<template>
  <div>
    <h1>My dialog</h1>
    <LazyDialog v-if="show" />
    <button v-if="!show" @click="show = true">Show Dialog</button>
  </div>
</template>
<script setup>
export default {
  const show = ref(false)
}
</script>
```

Finally, to optimise images in Nuxt 3, you can use the image module also maintained by the Nuxt team. This component automatically optimizes images for different screen sizes and resolutions, reducing the size of your website. To use the image component, you need to install the @nuxt/image package and import it into your component. Here is an example:

```bash
yarn add @nuxt/image
# or
npm install @nuxt/image
```

```vue
<template>
  <div>
    <nuxt-img
      src="/path/to/image.jpg"
      width="500"
      height="500"
      :blur-up="true"
    />
  </div>
</template>
```

## 4. Data fetching like a pro

In Nuxt 3, data fetching is handled using different composable functions such as **useFetch**, **useLazyFetch**, **useAsyncData**, and **useLazyAsyncData**. These functions can be used within pages, components, and plugins to fetch data from any URL.

Let's start with the most basic fetching composable Nuxt 3 provides, a globally available `$fetch`, a wrapper around the native **fetch** that can handle making direct API calls if it's running on the server or making a client-side call to your API if it's running on the client. It also comes with convenience features including automatically parsing responses and stringifying data.
Here's an example of how to use `$fetch`:

```vue
<script setup>
const { data: count } = await $fetch("/api/count");
</script>
```

Next up, the useAsyncData function which is used to get access to data that resolves asynchronously. It might have more complex logic than useFetch, which we will see just after.

Here's an example of how to use useAsyncData to fetch data from the API:

```javascript
// server/api/count.ts
let counter = 0;

export default defineEventHandler(() => {
  counter++;

  return counter;
});
```

```vue
<!-- App.vue -->
<script setup>
const { data: count } = await useAsyncData("count", () => {
  // Could do something else in here
  return $fetch("/api/count");
});
</script>
<template>Page visits: {{ count }}</template>
<!-- 1 -->
```

While useFetch is a convenient function around **useAsyncData** and **$fetch**. It automatically generates a key based on URL and fetch options, provides type hints for request URL based on server routes, and infers API response type.

Here's how you would fetch our count data using useFetch:

```vue
<script setup>
const { data: count } = await useFetch("/api/count");
</script>

<template>Page visits: {{ count }}</template>
<!-- 2 -->
```

The useLazyFetch function behaves identically to useFetch but with the lazy: true option set, which means the async function does not block navigation.

Here's an example of how to use useLazyFetch to fetch our ever growing counter:

```vue
<template>
  <div v-if="pending">Loading ...</div>

  <div v-else>
    <template>Page visits: {{ count }}</template>
    <!-- 3 -->
  </div>
</template>

<script setup>
const { pending, data: count } = useLazyFetch("/api/count");

watch(count, (newCount) => {
  // Because count starts out null, you will not have access
  // to its contents immediately, but you can watch it.
});
</script>
```

The `useLazyAsyncData` is basically what **useLazyFetch** is to **useFetch** as it behaves identically like `useAsyncData` but with the `lazy: true` option set.

Let's see how to use it:

```vue
<template>
  <div>{{ pending ? "Loading" : count }}</div>
</template>

<script setup>
const { pending, data: count } = useLazyAsyncData("count", () => {
  // Could do something else than fetching in here
  return $fetch("/api/count");
});

watch(count, (newCount) => {
  // Because count starts out null, you won't have access
  // to its contents immediately, but you can still watch it.
});
</script>
```

Note: The `useFetch()` composable also allows us to refresh the data loaded from the API using **refresh** like for a pagination:

```vue
<script setup>
const page = ref(1);

const {
  data: users,
  pending,
  refresh,
  error,
} = await useFetch(() => `users?page=${page.value}&take=6`, {
  baseURL: config.API_BASE_URL,
});

function previous() {
  page.value--;

  refresh();
}

function next() {
  page.value++;

  refresh();
}
</script>
```

Overall, Nuxt 3 provides different ways to handle data fetching and we can use the one that suits our needs the best but we still need to follow this best practices:

### Minimize Payload:

It's important to only select the keys that are needed in the component to minimize the payload. This is because the data returned by the composable functions will be stored inside the page payload, and every key returned that is not used in the component will be added to the payload.

```vue
<script setup>
const { data: posts } = await useFetch("/api/posts", {
  pick: ["id", "title", "description"],
});
</script>

<template>
  <div v-for="post in posts" :key="post.id">
    <h1>{{ post.title }}</h1>
    <p>{{ post.description }}</p>
  </div>
</template>
```

### Avoid Double Calls:

Calling `$fetch` means code that is executed on both server and client fetching the data twice, initially on the server and then again on the client during the hydration phase. To avoid this, wrap `$fetch` with `useAsyncData()` or use `useFetch()`.

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
// Bad
const { data } = await $fetch("/api/posts");

// Good
const { data } = await useAsyncData("posts", () => $fetch("/api/posts"));
// or
const { data } = await useFetch("/api/posts");
</script>
```

## 5. SEO rank has high as you can

### 1. Customize the Head for Your Entire App:

Nuxt provides sane defaults for the head, which you can override if needed. You can customize the head for your entire app by providing an `app.head` property in your `nuxt.config.ts` file. For example:

```javascript
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  app: {
    head: {
      title: "My App",
      meta: [{ name: "description", content: "My amazing site." }],
      script: [{ innerHTML: "console.log('Hello world')" }],
    },
  },
});
```

### 2. Use `useHead()` in `app.vue`:

While `app.head` allows you to customize the head for your entire app, it does not allow you to provide reactive data. To provide reactive data, it is recommended to use `useHead()` in `app.vue`. For example:

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
const title = ref("My App");
const description = ref("My amazing site.");

useHead({
  title,
  meta: [{ name: "description", content: description }],
  script: [{ innerHTML: `console.log('${title}')` }],
});
</script>
```

### 3. Use `useSeoMeta()` and `useServerSeoMeta()`:

To define your site's SEO meta tags as a flat object with full TypeScript support, you can use `useSeoMeta()`. If you want to go even further into the optimize and know your meta tags don't need to be reactive use `useServerSeoMeta()` which is a performance-focused utility that will not do anything other than return a head object on the client. For example:

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">

const title = ref("My App");
useSeoMeta({
  title,
  ogTitle: "My Amazing Site",
  description: "This is my amazing site, let me tell you all about it.",
  ogDescription: "This is my amazing site, let me tell you all about it.",
  ogImage: "https://example.com/image.png",
})  

useServerSeoMeta({
  title: "My app",
  ogTitle: "My Amazing Site",
  description: "This is my amazing site, let me tell you all about it.",
  ogDescription: "This is my amazing site, let me tell you all about it.",
  ogImage: "https://example.com/image.png",
});
</script>
```

### 4. Use Nuxt built-in Components:

Nuxt provides components such as `<Title>`, `<Base>`, `<NoScript>`, `<Style>`, `<Meta>`, `<Link >`, `<Body>`, `<Html>`, and `<Head>` to interact directly with metadata within component templates. So you could do something like this:

```vue
<template>
  <div>
    <Head>
      <Title>My App</Title>
      <Meta name="description" content="My amazing site." />
      <Script innerHTML="console.log('Hello world')" />
    </Head>

    <h1>Welcome to My App</h1>
  </div>
</template>
```

All of this tools are available in Nuxt 3 and you can use them to improve your SEO rankings.

## Conclusion
Nuxt 3 is a powerful framework for building fast and efficient web applications. ou can take advantage of the latest features and optimizations in Nuxt 3 to build high-performance websites than will rank as high as technically possible. Whether you are building a simple blog or a complex web application, Nuxt 3 has everything you need to get the job done.
