---
id: 11
title: "Problem solving"
description: "A blueprint to solve any problem in a structured way."
category: "Javascript"
last_updated: "9 November 2023"
---

Today, i would like to share with you the process i developed to solve any problem in a structured and strategic way that is reproductible by everyone. Although this won't give serve you in any way to solve a specific problem it allows you to have a plan for dealing with problems in general. 

## Understand the problem

Like anything in life if you don't understand the problem or you struggle to wrap your head around a certain topic then it'll be hard to deal with it. So the first step is really to understand the problem. When you believe you understand the problem make sure to reformulate it in your own word. If you have someone if front of you, even better you can verify with them if what you understood matches what they asked you.

TODO: example

## Examples
Once you understand the problem make sure to write a few examples that could highlight the problem, it also serves a double purpose to help you as a base case when you'll later on test your solution.

TODO: example

## Break down
If a problem is complex enough to be considered a problem it usually involves a few different steps. So you should try to break the problem into pieces, some you'll be able to solve right away some you won't but that's ok because every time you solve a piece of a problem you get closer to the solution. No one can solve a puzzle in one step right?

Breaking the problem into pieces also allows you to prioritize, focus on what matters for now and even prevents you from panicking like when you're facing a problem so big you don't even know where to start.

TODO: example

## Solve or simplify
Now that you have everything you need to solve the problem, pick the piece of your choice, solve it, go to the next one. If somehow you don't manage to solve it then it probably means you should simplify it, start small and build up. 

At some point you might get to 90% of a solution before being stuck. Obviously simplification won't always work so then you'll need to look elsewhere, google is your friend or nowadays it might be chatbot (although be careful about its bullshitting capabilities always make sure to verify what he says, either by testing or by googling).

## Look back and refactor
Once you have your solution working and battle tested, you should come back to your code, preferably with a fresh eye, let's say the next morning and look for errors, cases you did not think about, potential simplifications, ask yourself would anyone (even you) be able to reread and understand your code, remove comments where you left them or even rename variables and functions to make it easier to understand the next time you'll look at it.


