---
id: 3
title: "Clean code JavaScript"
subtitle: "Best Practices for writing maintainable, scalable, and readable JS code."
description: "In this article, i'll show you the established best practices for writing clean and readable JavaScript code, including naming conventions, using ES6 features, avoiding global variables, keeping functions as small as possible, and more."
category: "Javascript"
last_updated: "December 20th, 2022"
---

## What is clean code?

That's a really controversial question and i'd like to say there are many answers to this topic but as a general idea **Clean code** is code that is easy to read, understand, and maintain. **How would you recognize clean code ?**  Well it should be well-organized, well-structured, easy to modify, test, and debug. Following best practices and industry standards, allows you to write code free from bloat, redundancy, and complexity. Let me share some of these best practices to you.

## Naming Conventions
While it may seem basic, giving careful consideration to variable names can be crucial to making code readable and maintainable. Using descriptive and meaningful names for variables, functions, and objects can help reduce the cognitive load required to understand and work with code. Avoiding abbreviations and other shortcuts can further help improve code clarity and readability.

For example, instead of using a vague variable name like **data**, consider using a more descriptive name that reflects the actual data being represented, such as **customerData** or **productList**.

```js
// ❌ Bad example
const d = [1, 2, 3];

// ✅ Good example
const data = [1, 2, 3];

// ❌ Bad example
function f(a) {
  return a + 1;
}

// ✅ Good example
function addOne(number) {
  return number + 1;
}
```

### And please name your functions
Name all functions, including closures and callbacks. Avoid anonymous functions. This is especially useful when profiling a node app. Naming all functions will allow you to easily understand what you're looking at when checking a memory snapshot.
Otherwise, debugging production issues using a core dump (memory snapshot) might become challenging as you notice significant memory consumption from anonymous functions.

## Use ES6 Features
**ES6**, the latest version of JavaScript, introduced several features that can greatly improve the cleanliness and conciseness of JavaScript code. Just to name a few, **destructuring** allows developers to extract values from arrays or objects more easily, **arrow functions** offer a more concise syntax for defining functions, and **template literals** enable the embedding of expressions in **string literals** without the need for concatenation or escaping characters.

```js
// Const and let declarations
const PI = 3.14;
let name = 'John Doe';

// Template literals
const message = `Hello ${name}!`;

// Arrow functions
const square = (x) => x * x;

// Default parameters
const add = (a, b = 0) => a + b;

// Destructuring
const data = [1, 2, 3];
const [first, second, third] = data;

const person = {
  firstName: 'John',
  lastName: 'Doe'
};
const { firstName, lastName } = person;

// Spread operator
const lotus = [1, 2, 3];
const numbers = [...lotus, 4, 5, 6]; // [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]

// Rest parameters
const sum = (...numbers) => numbers.reduce((total, current) => total + current, 0); // 21

// Object literals
const firstName = 'John';
const lastName = 'Doe';
const person = { firstName, lastName };

// Class syntax
class Person {
  constructor(firstName, lastName) {
    this.firstName = firstName;
    this.lastName = lastName;
  }

  getFullName() {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
}
```
## Avoid Global Variables
**Global variables** can pose several problems, including naming conflicts and reduced maintainability, they should generally be avoided unless the goal is to share this variable accross the app like **env variables**. To organize and manage code more effectively, consider using modules instead. Modules provide a way to encapsulate related code and data, minimizing the risk of naming conflicts, unexpected side effects and ultimately making it easier to maintain and update the code. 

```js
// ❌ Bad example
counter = 0;

function incrementCounter() {
  counter++;
}

// ✅ Good example
let counter = 0;

function incrementCounter() {
  counter++;
}

// ✅ Better example
function createCounter() {
  let counter = 0;

  return {
    increment: function () {
      counter++;
    },
    getCount: function () {
      return counter;
    }
  };
}

const counter = createCounter();
```

- **Bad example** : the variable counter is declared as a global variable, which can cause naming conflicts and make the code harder to maintain. 
- **Good example** : the variable is declared using the let keyword, which makes it a local variable and avoids the naming conflicts.
- **Better example** : the variable is encapsulated inside a function, which creates a closure. This way, the variable is not accessible from outside the function, making it truly private and avoiding any naming conflicts.

## Keep functions small
It is important to keep your functions small and focused on a single responsibility. By breaking down complex logic into smaller functions, you can increase the readability of your code and make it easier to reason about. Smaller functions are often more reusable and easier to test which can save you time and effort in the long run.

**Always remember, functions should only do one thing and do it well.**

```js
// ❌ Bad example
function calculateOrderTotal(items, shippingMethod, discount) {
  let subtotal = 0;
  for (const item of items) {
    subtotal += item.price * item.quantity;
  }

  let shippingCost = 0;
  if (shippingMethod === 'standard') {
    shippingCost = subtotal * 0.1;
  } else if (shippingMethod === 'express') {
    shippingCost = subtotal * 0.2;
  }

  let discountAmount = 0;
  if (discount) {
    discountAmount = subtotal * discount;
  }

  return subtotal + shippingCost - discountAmount;
}

// ✅ Good example
function calculateSubtotal(items) {
  let subtotal = 0;
  for (const item of items) {
    subtotal += item.price * item.quantity;
  }
  return subtotal;
}

function calculateShippingCost(subtotal, shippingMethod) {
  let shippingCost = 0;
  if (shippingMethod === 'standard') {
    shippingCost = subtotal * 0.1;
  } else if (shippingMethod === 'express') {
    shippingCost = subtotal * 0.2;
  }
  return shippingCost;
}

function calculateDiscountAmount(subtotal, discount) {
  let discountAmount = 0;
  if (discount) {
    discountAmount = subtotal * discount;
  }
  return discountAmount;
}

function calculateOrderTotal(items, shippingMethod, discount) {
  const subtotal = calculateSubtotal(items);
  const shippingCost = calculateShippingCost(subtotal, shippingMethod);
  const discountAmount = calculateDiscountAmount(subtotal, discount);
  return subtotal + shippingCost - discountAmount;
}
```

- **Bad example**, the function calculateOrderTotal is doing too many things. It's difficult to understand what the function does without stepping through each line.
- **Good example**, the code is refactored into smaller, more manageable functions. Each function has a single responsibility, making the code easier to understand, test, and maintain.

## Use Linting
Linting is a helpful tool that can improve the quality of your code. It checks for potential errors, bugs, and coding violations to ensure that your code follows best practices and conventions. Using a linting tool like **ESLint**, helps you keep your code clean, maintainable, and catch errors before they cause problems. Here's an simple example of how you can use **ESLint** to improve your code:

```sh
npm install eslint --save-dev
```

Create a file named **.eslintrc** in the root of your project and add the following configuration:

```json
// .eslintrc
{
  "extends": "eslint:recommended",
  "rules": {
    "no-console": "off"
  }
}
```

Now you can run **ESLint** on your code by using the following command:

```sh
npx eslint your-file.js
```

```js
// ❌ Original code
const name = 'John Doe';
console.log('Hello, ' + name);

// ✅ Corrected code
const name = 'John Doe';
console.log(`Hello, ${name}`);
```
As annoying as it might seem at the beginning with all those red lines poping it ensures your code is easier to understand and maintain, both for your future self and for other developers who'll work on the project, and believe me, they'll thank you for it.

## Avoid Magic Numbers
Magic numbers are numeric literals used in the code without context or explanation. A better approach is to use descriptive variable names to represent these values.
Here's an example of using descriptive variables to avoid magic numbers in JavaScript:
    
```js
// ❌ Bad example
function calculateTax(amount) {
  return amount * 0.2; // What does 0.2 represent?
}

// ✅ Good example
const TAX_RATE = 0.2;

function calculateTax(amount) {
  return amount * TAX_RATE; // Much clearer what the calculation does
}
```

## Follow the Single Responsibility Principle
The Single Responsibility Principle (**SRP**) is a fundamental principle in software development that states that every module, class, or function should have a single, well-defined responsibility.

Let's take a look of an example of **SRP**:

```js
class User {
  constructor(name, email, password) {
    this.name = name;
    this.email = email;
    this.password = password;
  }

  getName() {
    return this.name;
  }

  getEmail() {
    return this.email;
  }

  setPassword(password) {
    this.password = password;
  }

  sendEmail() {
    // code to send an email to the user
  }
}
```

Here, the **User** class has a single, well-defined responsibility: managing a user's information.
The **getName** and **getEmail** methods retrieve the user's name and email address respectively. While the **setPassword** method updates the user's password, and the **sendEmail** method sends an email to the user.

Each method does exactly what it states and they don't overlap or have multiple responsibilities.

## Write Test Cases
When you write code, you want it to work correctly and not break unexpectedly when deploying to production. That's where test cases come in. Think of them as a way to double-check your work and make sure your code does what it's supposed to do.

When you write test cases, be sure to cover all the important parts of your code. That includes the normal situations, but also the tricky edge cases where things might not work as intended. You'll also want to test what happens when something goes wrong, like when a user enters the wrong input or when you API is down for whatever reason.

By taking the time to write good test cases, you can catch mistakes and bugs early in the process. That means you can fix them before they become bigger problems down the line. Plus, having good test cases means you can make changes and updates to your code with more confidence, knowing that you're not introducing new problems or breaking what's currently working.

## Use Descriptive Error Messages
When programming, we all make mistakes and encounter issues with our code. However, with the help of error messages, we can quickly identify and fix these issues. 

It's essential to create error messages that are clear and informative, explaining the cause of the error and providing guidance on how to fix it can save us a lot of time and frustration in the long run by helping us quickly diagnose and address any problems that arise in our code. So, always take the time to craft descriptive error messages that can make the debugging process more manageable and less stressful.

```js
try {
  // code that may throw an error
  if (someCondition) {
    throw new Error("Invalid argument: someCondition must be true");
  }
} catch (error) {
  console.error(error.message);
}
```

In this example, we use a try-catch block to handle errors. If the code inside the try block throws an error, the error message is caught and logged to the console using console.error(). 

The error message includes the description **"Invalid argument: someCondition must be true"**, which provides enough information to help the developer understand the cause of the error and how to fix it.

*As a side benefit it might allow you to find the bugging line in your code in case you didn't share your sourcemaps.*

Additionally, if our code is being used by others, providing descriptive error messages can improve the overall user experience by helping users to quickly understand what went wrong which provides a better user experience, reduces frustration and confusion.

## Refactor Regularly

**Refactoring is the process of improving the internal structure of your code without changing its behavior.** 

As your code grows and changes over time, it can become more complex and harder to maintain. 
Refactoring can help improve the performance of your code, reduce bugs and errors, and make it easier for you and other developers to understand and modify the code in the future.

For example, let's pretend you have a piece of code that has become difficult to manage and understand:


```js
function calculateSum(numbers) {
  let sum = 0;
  for (let i = 0; i < numbers.length; i++) {
    sum += numbers[i];
  }
  return sum;
}
```

This code calculates the sum of an array of numbers. Over time, however, the code may become harder to maintain as the number of responsibilities or the complexity of the code increases.

To address this, we can refactor the code using **reduce** :

```js
function calculateSum(numbers) {
  return numbers.reduce((sum, number) => sum + number, 0);
}
```

## Start a Codeblock's Curly Braces on the Same Line
The opening curly braces of a code block should be on the same line as the opening statement. Deferring from this best practice might lead to unexpected results. As seen in the StackOverflow thread below, some developers have noticed that results vary based on curly brace placement.

```js
// Do
function someFunction() {
// code block
}


// Avoid
function someFunction()
{
// code block
}
```

## Separate your statements properly
No matter if you use semicolons or not to separate your statements, knowing the common pitfalls of improper line breaks or automatic semicolon insertion will help you eliminate regular syntax errors. Use ESLint to gain awareness about separation concerns. Prettier or Standardjs can automatically resolve these issues.


```js
// Do
function doThing() {
// ...
}


doThing()


// Do


const items = [1, 2, 3]
items.forEach(console.log)


// Avoid — throws exception
const m = new Map()
const a = [1,2,3]
[...m.values()].forEach(console.log)


[...m.values()].forEach(console.log)
^^^
SyntaxError: Unexpected token ...


// Avoid — throws exception
const count = 2 // it tries to run 2(), but 2 is not a function
(function doSomething() {
// do something amazing
}())
// put a semicolon before the immediate invoked function, after the const definition, save the return value of the anonymous function to a variable, or avoid IIFEs altogether
```

## Conclusion
Writing clean and readable code is essential to produce quality software. Following the best practices mentioned above, such as keeping functions short and focused on a single responsibility, using descriptive variable and function names, avoiding magic numbers, and using error messages can make your code more maintainable, scalable, and easier to understand.

It is important to remember that writing clean code is not a one-time task, but a continuous process that requires practice and discipline. As you practice writing clean code, you will find it easier to maintain and build upon your existing codebase, which can save you time and effort in the long run. By continuously improving the quality of your code, you can produce software that is reliable, efficient, and easy to work with.

Keep the good work and happy coding! 🚀