---
id: 1
title: "How to set up TypeScript with Node.js and Express"
subtitle: "In this article, we’ll cover a beginner-friendly way to set up TypeScript in an Express app, understanding the basic constraints that come with it."
description: "Ease of development is great when you’re building a server written in JavaScript and using Node.js and Express. But what happens when your application server scales, or you’re working on a team of developers all across the world? In these instances, TypeScript can help."
category: "Node"
last_updated: "22 October 2022"
---

## Table of contents
- Installing TypeScript
- Generating tsconfig.json
- Create an Express server with a .ts extension
- Watching file changes and build directory
- Conclusion

## Installing TypeScript

We’ll start by installing TypeScript as a dev dependency. Along with it, we’ll install the the @types declaration packages for Express and Node.js, which provide type definitions in the form of declaration files.

Declaration files are predefined modules that describe the shape of JavaScript values, or the types present, for the TypeScript compiler. Type declarations are usually contained in files with a .d.ts extension. These declaration files are available for all libraries that were originally written in JavaScript, not TypeScript.

The DefinitelyTyped GitHub repository maintains the TypeScript type definitions for use directly in Node.js and other JavaScript projects, so you don’t have to define these types from scratch. To add these types or the declaration files related to a particular library or a module, you have to look for the packages that start with the @types namespace.

```js
// with yarn
yarn add -D typescript @types/express @types/node

// with npm
npm i -D typescript @types/express @types/node
```

The -D flag, also known as the --dev flag, is a specification for the package manager to install these libraries as devDependencies.

Once these libraries are installed, go to the package.json file where you’ll see a new devDependencies object:

```json
"devDependencies": {
    "@types/express": "^4.17.14",
    "@types/node": "^18.11.9",
    "typescript": "^4.8.4"
}
```

## Generating tsconfig.json

Now, we have a TypeScript project compiled with some default configuration options. The tsconfig.json file provides these default options and also provides us with the ability to tweak or customize the compiler options.

Typically, the tsconfig.json file lives at the root of the project. To generate it, we’ll use the tsc command:

```js
npx tsc --init
```

If you open the tsconfig.json file, you’ll see a lot of other compiler options that are commented out. In tsconfig.json, compilerOptions is a mandatory field that needs to be specified. The options used in the config above are:

- **target:** Allows us to specify the target JavaScript version that the compiler will output
- **module:** Allows us to use a module manager in the compiled JavaScript code. CommonJS is supported and is a standard in Node.js
- **strict:** An option that enables strict type-checking options
- **esModuleInterop:** Allows us to compile ES6 modules to CommonJS modules
- **skipLibCheck:** If set to true, skips type-checking of default library declaration files
- **forceConsistentCasingInFileNames:** When set to true, enables case sensitive file naming


One option that you will have to enable is called outDir, which specifies where the output will be located after the compilation step. You can search for this option in the tsconfig.json file and uncomment it.

By default, the value of this option is set to the root directory. Change it to dist:

```js
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "outDir": "./dist"

    // rest options remain same
  }
}
```

While there are probably other configuration options that you can add on to the TypeScript compiler, the options listed above are basic specifications that can help you get started.


## Create an Express server with a .ts extension
Now, you can easily convert the minimal server code in index.js to an index.ts file.

First, rename the file to index.ts. The .ts extension is a file extension that determines what TypeScript files are compiled to JavaScript files later when we build the server.

Open the index.ts file and modify it, as shown below:


```ts
import express, { Express, Request, Response } from 'express';
import dotenv from 'dotenv';

dotenv.config();

const app: Express = express();
const port = process.env.PORT;

app.get('/', (req: Request, res: Response) => {
  res.send('Express + TypeScript Server');
});

app.listen(port, () => {
  console.log(`⚡️[server]: Server is running at https://localhost:${port}`);
});
```


## Add type for all packages you might be using:

```tsw
yarn add -D @types/cors
yarn add -D @types/express-jwt
```

## Watching file changes and build directory

Watching file changes and build directory
Another development-related utility library I like to use when working on Node.js projects is nodemon. nodemon is a tool that helps develop Node.js based applications by automatically restarting the Node.js application when file changes in the directory are detected.

We’ll also install another dev dependency called Concurrently, which will allow us to run multiple commands like nodemon to watch file changes and the tsc command to compile the code:

**npm install -D concurrently nodemon**

After installing these dev dependencies, update the scripts in the package.json file:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "build": "npx tsc",
    "start": "node dist/index.js",
    "dev": "concurrently \"npx tsc --watch\" \"nodemon -q dist/index.js\""
  }
}
```

The build command will compile the code in JavaScript inside a dist directory. The dev command is used to run the Node.js server in development mode.

Now, go back to the terminal window and run npm run dev to trigger the development server:

## Conclusion
