---
id: 16
title: "Stack"
subtitle: "Understanding the Basics and Implementations"
description: "Explore the fundamentals of the stack data structure, its operations, and how to implement it in JavaScript."
category: "JavaScript"
last_updated: "3 Juillet 2025"
---

## Stack

Today we will talk about stacks, why? Well, because stacks are a mandatory data structure to know as it powers most of what we see in the modern web, do i need to say more than the **JavaScript stack**?

So what is a stack? Well a stack is a collection of items that will be handled in a particular order, **LIFO**, which stands for last in first out kind of like a stack of plates, the first one you stack will be the last one to be washed otherwise it'd be pretty annoying right?

## Implementation

Now that we know what a stack is we will implement it together. We essentially have two possibilities, one which consists of simply using an array with it's built in capabilities and its drawbacks and the second one with a custom data structure.

### Built in array

What built in methods could we use from **array** to build a stack? Keep in mind that we should apply the **Last in, first out** strategy. Well i know two perfect methods for this:

- **push:** method that adds an item to the end of the array
- **pop:** method which removes the last item from the array

```javascript
const stack = [];
stack.push(1); // [1]
stack.push(2); // [1,2]
stack.pop(); // [1]
```

::note
You might ask yourself why not use **shift** which removes the first element from the array and **unshift** which adds the new item to the beginning of the array, well we could but if we are dealing with a big dataset then we need to consider the fact that every items are indexed based meaning with both **shift** and **unshift** we need to reassign every item's index after every call.
::

## Custom data structure
Now on to our second solution, creating our own data structure, the **stack** class which is essentially a [linked list](https://blog.melvinvmegen.com/posts/javascript/singly_linked_list), meaning it has a **head** (storing the first item), a **tail** (storing the last one) and a **length** property (I'll let you guess this one).

```javascript
class Stack {
  constructor() {
    this.head = null;
    this.tail = null;
    this.length = 0;
  }
}
```

As mentioned, a stack is composed of items and more specifically **nodes** which are represented like that:

```javascript
class Node {
  constructor(value) {
    this.value = value;
    this.next = null;
  }
}
```

Here, every node has two properties a **value** and a **next** which holds the next item.

Now from there we only need two methods, we'll call them the same as for arrays **push** and **pop** but you can call them however you want.

## Push

```javascript
function push(value) {
  const newNode = new Node(value);
  if (this.length === 0) {
    this.head = newNode;
    this.tail = newNode;
  } else {
    const temp = this.head;
    this.head = newNode;
    this.head.next = temp;
  }
  this.length++;
  return this.length;
}
```

### Explanation

So here quite simple we create a new node with the provided value, from there we have two cases to handle:
- the stack is empty, we set our head and tail to be our **newNode**
- otherwise, we set the second node to be the current head before replacing it with the new node

Once done we take care of bookkeeping by increasing the length and return it.

## Pop

```javascript
function pop() {
  if (this.length === 0) return null;
  const toRemove = this.head;
  if (this.length === 1) {
    this.tail = null;
  }
  this.head = this.head.next;
  this.length--;
  return toRemove;
}
```

### Explanation
Again we have a few cases to handle:
- there is no nodes in the stack, we simply return 
- there is only one node? we simply set **last** to null
- there is more than one node? we simply set **first** to be the second node or **first.next** (note that when we only have one node first.next will be null so we're also taking care of first)

Once done we take care of bookkeeping by decreasing the length and returning the node we just removed.

So that's all we need:

```javascript
const stack = new Stack();
stack.push(1); // 1
stack.push(2); // 2
stack.shift(); // Node {value: 2, next: null}
```

## Performance considerations

With both solutions, both function are extremely efficient it's always constant time, no need to reassign every node's index. For this particular use case a singly linked list is perfect. But if you wanted to do some lookup inside the stack,traversing would be required and you should consider using another data structure.

- **Push:** O(1) for adding an element to the end of the stack.
- **Pop:** O(1) for removing an element from the end of the stack.

## Practical Use Cases

Stacks are widely used in programming due to their simplicity and efficiency. Here are some common use cases:
- Function Call Management
- Undo/Redo Operations
- Browser History
- Recursion

## Conclusion

Congrats 🎉 you made it through I hope you learned a lot, I certainly did and if you have any suggestions, improvements or anything that comes to your mind don't hesitate to write in the comments I'll reply asap!

Happy coding
